Update UART documentation for Raspberry Pi 5 (#3294)
raspberrypi/documentation: documentation/asciidoc/computers/configuration/uart.adoc

All UARTs on the Raspberry Pi are 3.3V only - damage will occur if they are connected to 5V systems. An adaptor can be used to connect to 5V systems. Alternatively, low-cost USB to 3.3V serial adaptors are available from various third parties.

> === Raspberry Pi 5

Reviewer: The "additional" comment makes more sense after the Pi 0-3 section (and after Pi 4 is more logical), and we should mention that the mini-UART has gone.

Reviewer: And this comment?

Author: I moved the section and added a note about the mini UART.

All UARTs on the Raspberry Pi are 3.3V only - damage will occur if they are connected to 5V systems. An adaptor can be used to connect to 5V systems. Alternatively, low-cost USB to 3.3V serial adaptors are available from various third parties.

=== Raspberry Pi 5

> On the Raspberry Pi 5, the primary UART is the mini UART port. The Raspberry Pi 5 also has an additional four PL011s, which are disabled by default:

Reviewer 2: I don't think we've ever referred to this as "mini UART port" anywhere?

On the Raspberry Pi, one UART is selected to be present on GPIO 14 (transmit) and 15 (receive) - this is the primary UART. By default, this will also be the UART on which a Linux console may be present. Note that GPIO 14 is pin 8 on the GPIO header, while GPIO 15 is pin 10.

On the Raspberry Pi 5, the primary UART appears on the Debug header.

=== Secondary UART

The secondary UART is not normally present on the GPIO connector. By default, the secondary UART is connected to the Bluetooth side of the combined wireless LAN/Bluetooth controller, on models which contain this controller.

=== Primary and Secondary UART

The following table summarises the assignment of UARTs on various Raspberry Pi devices:

|===
| Model | Primary/console | Secondary/Bluetooth

| Raspberry Pi Zero
| UART0
| UART1

| Raspberry Pi Zero W / Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W
| UART1
| UART0

| Raspberry Pi 1
| UART0
| UART1

| Raspberry Pi 2
| UART0
| UART1

| Raspberry Pi 3
| UART1
| UART0

| Compute Module 3 & 3+
| UART0
| UART1

| Raspberry Pi 4
| UART1
| UART0

| Raspberry Pi 5

> | UART10

Reviewer 3: What is UART10? it is not mentioned in the table of UART0 -> UART4 above. This isn't super clear. Nor is it clear how this relates to settings like /boot/cmdline.txt - is this table defaults?

Reviewer: The information is there, just spread across multiple sections:

> On the Raspberry Pi 5, the primary UART appears on the Debug header.

and:

| Model | Primary | Secondary |
|--------|--------|--------|
| Raspberry Pi 5 | UART10 | dedicated UART |

and:

> /dev/ttyAMA10 | Raspberry Pi 5 Debug UART

and:

> On the Raspberry Pi 5, /dev/serial0 is a symbolic link that points to /dev/ttyAMA10

Reviewer 3: ok maybe to explain my confusion a bit more. I think firstly it's not clear that /dev/ttyAMAx refers to UARTx. And I'm still not clear which UART from the PL011 is being used for UART10 - or is it another UART altogether? "Raspberry Pi 5 has an additional four PL011s, which are disabled by default:" doesn't mention UART10 so it might be handy to do that?

Reviewer: All the Pi 5 UARTs we use are PL011s. UARTs 0-4 are in the RP1 I/O chip, UART10 is in the BCM2712 SoC.

| Raspberry Pi 4
| secondary (Bluetooth)
| primary

> 

Reviewer: I would take Pi 5 out of this table - it's Bluetooth is controlled by yet another UART, not previously discussed. It can't be used for anything else, and with the latest kernels it doesn't get a `/dev/tty*` entry, so it's almost as if it doesn't exist.

Alternatively, change the table column headings to be Model, Primary, Secondary and put the UART numbers in each row (with a special note for Pi 5).

Reviewer: Change the column headings to "Primary/console" and "Secondary/Bluetooth". Drop the third column - it's all not needed (and mostly wrong).

| Raspberry Pi 5
| secondary (Bluetooth)
| primary
|===

> NOTE: The mini UART is disabled by default, whether it is designated primary or secondary UART.

Reviewer: No - only if it is the primary, or if Bluetooth is disabled.

| `/dev/serial1`
| secondary UART

| `/dev/ttyAMA10`
| Raspberry Pi 5 Debug UART
|===

`/dev/serial0` and `/dev/serial1` are symbolic links which point to either `/dev/ttyS0` or `/dev/ttyAMA0`.

> On the Raspberry Pi 5, `/dev/serial0` is a symbolic link that points to `/dev/ttyAMA10`. Due to changes in Bookworm, `/dev/serial1` does not exist by default on the Raspberry Pi 5. You can re-enable `serial1` by setting the following values in `config.txt`:

Reviewer: Sorry, I just noticed the second "on the Pi 5" here, which shouldn't be there - you won't see /dev/serial1 on any Pi when the kernel is managing Bluetooth. It's probably worth at least splitting the paragraph after the first sentence, but the second sentence could be moved to make it more prominent since it in some part invalidates/obviates some of what has gone before. I'm not going to push for that - just dropping the 2nd "on the Pi 5" is enough to make it correct.

Author: ```suggestion
On the Raspberry Pi 5, `/dev/serial0` is a symbolic link that points to `/dev/ttyAMA10`.

Due to changes in Bookworm, `/dev/serial1` does not exist by default. You can re-enable `serial1` by setting the following values in `config.txt`:
```

| secondary UART
|===

> `/dev/serial0` and `/dev/serial1` are symbolic links which point to either `/dev/ttyS0` or `/dev/ttyAMA0`.

Reviewer 2: Again I don't think I've ever seen us use the term "mini UART"

Reviewer: It is a thing - the cut-down 8250 clone - and I'm sure some of my early documentation referred to it.

Reviewer 4: The 2711 datasheet refers to it as a mini UART. That's the terminology that we have always used.

Reviewer 2: Fascinating. I've never heard anyone refer to it like that. But then I haven't seen the 2711 datasheet.

Reviewer 5: See page 10 of https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/bcm2711/bcm2711-peripherals.pdf

Reviewer: The Pi 5 doesn't possess a mini UART, as I've already commented.

Reviewer 5: I think Alasdair might be confusing what Phil and James are calling the "mini UART" (the cut-down 8250 clone in the SoCs for Pi0-4) which is also mentioned in https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/configuration.html#configuring-uarts , with the[ 3-pin debug UART connector](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/debug/debug-connector-specification.pdf) on the Pi 5? (which I agree shouldn't be called a "mini UART").

Reviewer 2: Ah! I am indeed doing that.

On the Raspberry Pi 5 `serial0` maps by default to `/dev/ttyAMA10`. Due to changes in Bookworm, `/dev/serial1` does not exist by default. You can enable `serial1` by setting the following values in `confix.txt`:

[source,bash]
----
dtparam=krnbt=off
----

> 

Reviewer: > However, this is not recommended, and the option may not work on all models in future.

| secondary UART
|===

`/dev/serial0` and `/dev/serial1` are symbolic links which point to either `/dev/ttyS0` or `/dev/ttyAMA0`.

> On the Raspberry Pi 5, `/dev/serial0` is a symbolic link that points to `/dev/ttyAMA10`. Due to changes in Bookworm, `/dev/serial1` does not exist by default on the Raspberry Pi 5. You can enable `serial1` by setting the following values in `confix.txt`:

Reviewer: Typo - `config.txt`. I'd also change the line to say "re-enable" rather than "enable".

Author: ```suggestion
On the Raspberry Pi 5, `/dev/serial0` is a symbolic link that points to `/dev/ttyAMA10`. Due to changes in Bookworm, `/dev/serial1` does not exist by default on the Raspberry Pi 5. You can re-enable `serial1` by setting the following values in `config.txt`:
```

[source,bash]
----
dtparam=krnbt=off
----

> TIP: This option may not work on all models in the future.

Reviewer: "This option _is almost certainly not what you really want,_ and may not work on all models in the future."

Although the Linux kernel starts the UARTs relatively early in the boot process, it is still long after some critical bits of infrastructure have been set up. A failure in those early stages can be hard to diagnose without access to the kernel log messages from that time. To enable `earlycon` support for one of the UARTs, add one of the following options to `cmdline.txt`, depending on which UART is the primary:

> For Raspberry Pi 5, 4, 400 and Compute Module 4:

Reviewer: No - Pi 5 is different. The earlycon output only appears on the 3-pin Debug connector, and the magic runes are:
```
earlycon=pl011,0x107d001000,115200n8
```
